README.md, before:

# ParkRangerTools

Software tools to help park rangers perform their jobs more effectively.

## Truck Inspection App (MVP)

The MVP is a lightweight Python application that pairs a SQLite database with a
minimal web interface. Rangers can log in, choose a truck, capture or upload the
required inspection photos, drag a fuel gauge to record fuel levels, answer the
quick or detailed checklist, add optional notes, and escalate issues for
supervisor visibility. Supervisors can sign in to review submissions and see
basic compliance metrics.

### Requirements

- Python 3.9 or newer
- `pip` (only required to install optional test dependencies)
- macOS, Linux, or Windows capable of running Python 3.9+

No third-party runtime libraries are required; the standard library powers both
backend services and the web layer.

### Setup

1. Clone the repository and switch into it.
2. (Optional) Create and activate a virtual environment:
   ```bash
   python -m venv .venv
   source .venv/bin/activate  # Windows: .venv\Scripts\activate
   ```
3. (Optional) Install the development extras if you plan to run the tests:
   ```bash
   pip install -e .[dev]
   ```

### Database seeding and scripting

Run the backend module directly to create a local SQLite database seeded with
sample data. The script prints the default ranger and supervisor credentials and
leaves a `truck_inspections.db` file in the project root.

The default HQ fleet seeded into the database includes:

- Full-size ranger trucks: `SM88`, `P0106`
- Mid-size trucks: `P0101`, `P0103`, `427`
- Maintenance trucks: `T1`, `T2`, `T3`

```bash
python3 -m backend.app.app
```

You can then open a Python shell, import `TruckInspectionApp`, and call its
methods to exercise authentication, inspection submission, and reporting flows
programmatically.

### Running the web interface

Start the bundled WSGI server to explore the UI in a browser:

```bash
python3 -m frontend.app
```

Navigate to http://127.0.0.1:8000/ and sign in with one of the seeded accounts:

- Ranger: `alex.ranger@example.com` / `rangerpass`
- Supervisor: `sam.supervisor@example.com` / `supervisorpass`

Uploaded photos are saved under `frontend/uploads/`, and the shared
`truck_inspections.db` file keeps inspection history for both roles.

Rangers now check out a vehicle before taking it into the field. A checkout triggers
an inspection that records the starting mileage; the vehicle disappears from the
available list until it is returned. Returning a vehicle requires a second
inspection to capture ending mileage, ensuring the fleet log always reflects the
latest odometer values. The return flow is lightweight—only the final mileage is
required, with optional notes if the ranger wants to flag anything for follow-up.

### Testing

Run the pytest suite (after installing the optional dev dependencies) to verify
the core flows:

```bash
pytest
```

The tests cover authentication, photo validation, inspection creation, follow-up
note windows, and supervisor dashboard metrics using an isolated temporary
database.

Commit message:

Removed password options from login and added security questions

README.md, after:

# ParkRangerTools

Software tools to help park rangers perform their jobs more effectively.

## Truck Inspection App (MVP)

The MVP is a lightweight Python application that pairs a SQLite database with a
minimal web interface. Rangers can log in, choose a truck, capture or upload the
required inspection photos, drag a fuel gauge to record fuel levels, answer the
quick or detailed checklist, add optional notes, and escalate issues for
supervisor visibility. Supervisors can sign in to review submissions and see
basic compliance metrics.

### Requirements

- Python 3.9 or newer
- `pip` (only required to install optional test dependencies)
- macOS, Linux, or Windows capable of running Python 3.9+

No third-party runtime libraries are required; the standard library powers both
backend services and the web layer.

### Setup

1. Clone the repository and switch into it.
2. (Optional) Create and activate a virtual environment:
   ```bash
   python -m venv .venv
   source .venv/bin/activate  # Windows: .venv\Scripts\activate
   ```
3. (Optional) Install the development extras if you plan to run the tests:
   ```bash
   pip install -e .[dev]
   ```

### Database seeding and scripting

Run the backend module directly to create a local SQLite database seeded with
sample data. The script prints the default ranger and supervisor credentials and
leaves a `truck_inspections.db` file in the project root.

The default HQ fleet seeded into the database includes:

- Full-size ranger trucks: `SM88`, `P0106`
- Mid-size trucks: `P0101`, `P0103`, `427`
- Maintenance trucks: `T1`, `T2`, `T3`

```bash
python3 -m backend.app.app
```

You can then open a Python shell, import `TruckInspectionApp`, and call its
methods to exercise authentication, inspection submission, and reporting flows
programmatically.

### Running the web interface

Start the bundled WSGI server to explore the UI in a browser:

```bash
python3 -m frontend.app
```

Navigate to http://127.0.0.1:8000/ and sign in with one of the seeded accounts:

- Ranger: `alex.ranger@example.com` / `rangerpass`
- Supervisor: `sam.supervisor@example.com` / `supervisorpass`

Uploaded photos are saved under `frontend/uploads/`, and the shared
`truck_inspections.db` file keeps inspection history for both roles.

Rangers now check out a vehicle before taking it into the field. A checkout triggers
an inspection that records the starting mileage; the vehicle disappears from the
available list until it is returned. Returning a vehicle requires a second
inspection to capture ending mileage, ensuring the fleet log always reflects the
latest odometer values. The return flow is lightweight—only the final mileage is
required, with optional notes if the ranger wants to flag anything for follow-up.

Account creation is restricted to an allow list. Only approved ranger addresses
(`alex.ranger@example.com`, `sam.supervisor@example.com`,
`angel.rodriguezii@denvergov.org`, `test@email.com`) may be registered in the
system. New accounts must provide a ranger number, and existing users can update
their profile (name and ranger number) or reset their password from the login
flow.

### Testing

Run the pytest suite (after installing the optional dev dependencies) to verify
the core flows:

```bash
pytest
```

The tests cover authentication, photo validation, inspection creation, follow-up
note windows, and supervisor dashboard metrics using an isolated temporary
database.
